---
title: "{{title}}"
draft: true
---
Drifting around on music YouTube as I often do, something makes me nervous. I attempt to ignore it as I watch this or that gear review, or delve into some interesting [synthesis rabbit hole](https://youtu.be/oUhfkaVUPY8?t=370), but it's always there, watching me, laughing, taunting. I scroll as quickly as I can over video titles that so much as hint at it. When a video I'm watching begins to teeter toward it, I head for the door. It's suffocating; it's maddening. It's _pop music theory_.

I never used to spend much time on music YouTube. It's not that I didn't know it existed, really, it's just that 1) I tend to avoid social media I don't find _especially useful_, and 2) the kind of music I worked on back in college mainly involved acoustic instruments, meaning that I had no reason to watch hardware synthesis technique videos or guitar pedal reviews or what have you. Life was simpler back then, and I was naïve to the ways of the world.

However, when I began to take my guitar studies more seriously and started to explore hardware synthesis, forums and YouTube became the easiest paths forward. I avoided videos when I could, but it was hard to get around gear reviews. You really do need to hear how the stuff works to be able to make decisions. Likewise, while learning, sometimes I just had to _hear_ how that synth patch sounded, rather than simply reading about it. Videos were my lot in life; inescapable; sad.

To be fair, there are a number of good and interesting content creators out there. A relatively popular example is the YouTuber [Knobs](https://www.youtube.com/c/Knobs), who has managed to turn the dull business of gear review into something colorful and lively. But, the bulk of music YouTube - it gives me the creeps. It gives me feelings I don't want to have, and for a long time, I couldn't figure out why that was. But now I know.

_Pop music theory._

If I have to hear one more overly loud music YouTuber state emphatically that a chord is cool and emotional because it is _surprising_, or that a chord progression is deep and meaningful because it is _complex_, I'm going to absolutely lose my mind. Terms like these are devoid of meaning, and anyways - given the advent of recording - they've far outlived their usefulness. Listening to a track for the first time? OK, you might be surprised by the direction it takes. There might be a lot going on, and the track might come across as complex. Maybe. But the second listen? The third? That surprising chord you heard is no longer _surprising_ anymore, is it? And, if you're listening to music within the western canon, there are only 12 discrete pitch classes - the music can _only be so complex_.

I know, I know.  A tinge of elitism creeping in. But the truth is, I'm attempting to argue against the _faux-elitism_ of pop music theory. Apparent complexity is nothing more than an emergent property of simple components working in tandem. And a lot of the music that is touted as "intellectual" or "complex" really isn't at all - it's simple, the chords are simple, the individual voices are simple - it's not all that hard to understand. As far as we can tell, our brains understand what's happening in the musics we love [immediately and subconsciously](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/03057356211050117) - that's why we react to them _at all_. 

Touting lingo as knowledge is a grave sin, and the way I see it, it results in two bad things:

1. Gatekeeping. I know a ridiculous amount of people that have great instincts about music, but claim to know "nothing" because of this apparent lack of knowledge, mostly brought on by the loud pseudo-knowledgeable folks that use music theory terms (sometimes _incorrectly_) in place of better, more common vocabulary - or, even worse, who build their platforms on the lie that they can _hear better than you_ or can _get you to see what's really, truly interesting about the music_. Having a good ear is not about your ability to hear; it's always been about your ability to dissect and articulate what you hear. If you _don't get what they're saying_, or if _what they're saying isn't interesting to you_, it's not your fault. It's theirs.
2. Distraction. There are good, interesting things to talk about in the world of music. There really are. Theory, when applied carefully, is useful - but only when it is specific, and when it leads directly to a discussion of meaning. _Why_ is the piece of music meaningful? I can assure you it's not because the Bb7 chord leading back to the Cmaj7 tonic is _surprising_ (it's not, it's a [standard cadence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backdoor_progression)). Further: theory is not composition. It isn't how you write music. No, theory is applied after the fact. And so, if the theory you're doing exists in a vacuum, it's completely divorced from the meaning of the music - and isn't useful. To say something meaningful, you have to surround theory with context, attach it to hooks, explore specifics.

I think the icky feelings that haunt me as I wade through music YouTube, and oftentimes music discussion in general, are mainly a byproduct of bumping into folks that elevate the wrong things in music, labeling certain tracks as "genius" or "complex" or even just "great" because they meet a poorly-constructed rubric for music quality. And while these conversations are almost always in good faith, I'm sure, the unintended consequence is that brilliant, underrepresented musicians - especially those from minority communities - are needlessly pushed aside. Growing up, I missed out on at least a decade of rap because I was told it was too simple or uninteresting, or at least this was heavily implied by comparison to other musics. But, I mean - come on. Have you _heard_ jazz rap?

Anyways, in the event that any music YouTuber ever reads this, I'll part with these words: please, don't use music lingo when common everyday words will suffice. Please don't delve into music theory unless you're willing to get your hands dirty and do some serious contextualization work. And please, stop saying something is interesting because it is "surprising".